IV: THE HUNT FOR THE RING
(i) Of the Journey of the Black Riders
according to the account that Gandalf gave to Frodo
Gollum was captured in Mordor in the year 3017 and taken Barad-dûr, and there questioned and
tormented. When he had learned what he could from him, Sauron released him and sent him forth again.
He did not trust Gollum, for he divined something indomitable in him, which could not be overcome, even
by the Shadow of Fear, except by destroying him. But Sauron perceived the depth of Gollum's malice
towards those that had "robbed" him, and guessing that he would go in search of them to avenge himself,
Sauron hoped that his spies would thus be led to the Ring.
Gollum, however, was before long captured by Aragorn, and taken to Northern Mirkwood; and though he
was followed, he could not be rescued before he was in safe keeping. Now Sauron had never paid heed
to the "Halflings," even if he had heard of them, and he did not yet know where their land lay. From
Gollum, even under pain, he could not get any clear account, both because Gollum indeed had no certain
knowledge himself, and because what be knew he falsified. Ultimately indomitable he was, except by
death, as Sauron did not fully comprehend, being himself consumed by lust for the ring. Then he became
filled with a hatred of Sauron even greater than his terror, seeing in him truly his greatest enemy and rival.
Thus it was that he dared to pretend that he believed that the land the Halflings was near to the .places
where he had once dwelt beside the banks of the Gladden.
Now Sauron learning of the capture of Gollum by the chiefs of his enemies was in great haste and fear.
Yet all his ordinary spies and emissaries could bring him no tidings. And this was due largely both to the
vigilance of the Dúnedain and to the treachery of Saruman, whose own servants either waylaid or misled
the servants of Sauron. Of this Sauron became aware, but his arm was not yet long enough to reach
Saruman in Isengard. Therefore he hid his knowledge of Saruman's double-dealing and concealed his
wrath, biding his time, and preparing for the great war in which he planned to sweep all his enemies into
the western sea. At length he resolved that no others would serve him in this case but his mightiest
servants, the Ringwraiths, who had no will but his own, being each utterly subservient to the ring that had
enslaved him, which Sauron held.
Now few could understand even one of these fell creatures, and (as Sauron deemed) none could withstand
them when gathered together under their terrible captain, the Lord of Morgul. Yet this weakness they had
for Sauron's present purpose: so great was the terror that went with them (even invisible and unclad) that
their coming forth might soon be perceived and their mission be guessed by the Wise.
So it was that Sauron prepared two strokes - in which many saw the beginnings of the War of the Ring.
They were made together. The Orcs assailed the realm of Thranduil, with orders to recapture Gollum; and
the Lord of Morgul was sent forth openly to battle against Gondor. These things were done towards the
end of June 3018. Thus Sauron tested the strength and preparedness of Denethor, and found them more
than he had hoped. But that troubled him little, since be had used little force in the assault, and his chief
purpose was that the coming forth of the Nazgûl should appear only as part of his policy of war against
Gondor.
Therefore when Osgiliath was taken and the bridge broken Sauron stayed the assault, and the Nazgûl were
ordered to begin the search for the Ring. But Sauron did not underesteem the powers and vigilance of the
Wise, and the Nazgûl were commanded to act as secretly as they could. Now at that time the Chieftain of
the Ringwraiths dwelt in Minas Morgul with six companions, while the second to the Chief, Khamûl the
Shadow of the East, abode in Dol Guldur as Sauron's lieutenant, with one other as his messenger. 1
The Lord of Morgul therefore led his companions over Anduin, unclad and unmounted, and invisible to
eyes, and yet a terror to all living things that they passed near. It was, maybe, on the first day of July that
they went forth. They passed slowly and in stealth, through Anórien, and over the Entwade, and so into the
Wold, and rumour of darkness and a dread of men knew not what went before them. They reached the
west-shores of Anduin a little north of Sarn Gebir, as they had trysted; and there received horses and
raiment that were secretly ferried over the River. This was (it is thought) about the seventeenth of July.
Then they passed northward seeking for the Shire, the land of the Halflings.
About the twenty-second of July they met their companions, the Nazgûl of Dol Guldur, in the Field of
Celebrant. There they learned that Gollum had eluded both the Orcs that recaptured him, and the Elves
that pursued them, and had vanished. 2 They were told also by Khamûl that no dwelling of Halflings could
be discovered in the Vales of Anduin, and that the villages of the Stoors by the Gladden had long been
deserted. But the Lord of Morgul, seeing no better counsel, determined still to seek northward, hoping
maybe to come upon Gollum as well as to discover the Shire. That this would prove to be not far from the
hated land of Lórien seemed to him not unlikely, if it was not indeed within the fences of Galadriel. But
the power of the White Ring he would not defy, nor enter yet into Lórien. Passing therefore between
Lórien and the Mountains the Nine rode ever on into the North; and terror went before them and lingered
behind them; but they did not find what they sought nor learn any news that availed them.
At length they returned; but the summer was now far waned, and the wrath and fear of Sauron was
mounting. When they came back to the Wold September had come; and there they met messengers from
Barad-dûr conveying threats from their Master that filled even the Morgul-lord with dismay. For Sauron
had now learned of the words of prophecy heard in Gondor, and the going forth of Boromir, of Saruman's
deeds, and the capture of Gandalf. From these things he concluded indeed that neither Saruman nor any
other of the Wise had possession yet of the Ring, but that Saruman at least knew where it might be hidden.
Speed alone would now serve, and secrecy must be abandoned.
The Ringwraiths therefore were ordered to go straight to Isengard. They rode then through Rohan in haste,
and the terror of their passing was so great that many folk fled from the land, and went wildly away north
and west, believing that war out of the East was coming on the heels of the black horses.
Two days after Gandalf had departed from Orthanc, the Lord of Morgul halted before the Gate of
Isengard. Then Saruman, already filled with wrath and fear by the escape of Gandalf, perceived the peril
of standing between enemies, a known traitor to both. His dread was great, for his hope of deceiving
Sauron, or at the least of receiving his favour in victory, was utterly lost. Now either he himself must gain
the Ring or come to ruin and torment. But he was wary and cunning still, and he had ordered Isengard
against just such an evil chance. The Circle of Isengard was too strong for even the Lord of Morgul and
hiss company to assail without great force of war. Therefore to his challenge and demands he received
only the answer of the voice of Saruman, that spoke by some art as though it came from the Gate itself.
"It is not a land that you look for," it said. "I know what you seek, though you do not name it. I have it not,
as surely its servants perceive without telling; for if I had it, then you would bow before me and call me
Lord. And if I knew where this thing was hid, I should not be here, but long gone before you take it. There
is one only whom I guess to have this knowledge: Mithrandir, enemy of Sauron. And since it is but two
days since he departed from Isengard, seek him nearby."
Such was still the power of the voice of Saruman that even the Lord of the Nazgûl did not question what it
said, whether it was false or short of the full truth; but straightway he rode from the Gate and began to hunt
for Gandalf in Rohan. Thus it was that on the evening of the next day the Black Riders came upon Grima
Wormtongue as he hastened to bring word to Saruman that Gandalf was come to Edoras, and had warned
King Théoden of the treacherous designs of Isengard. In that hour the Wormtongue came near to death by
terror; but being inured to treachery he would have told all that he knew under less threat.
"Yea, yea, verily I can tell yon. Lord," he said. "I have overheard their speech together in Isengard. The
land of the Halflings: it was thence that Gandalf came, and desires to return. He seeks now only a horse.
"Spare me! I speak as swiftly as I may. West through the Gap of Rohan yonder, and then north and a little
west, until the next great river bars the way; the Greyflood it is called. Thence from the crossing at
Tharbad the old road will lead you to the borders. 'The Shire,' they call it.
"Yea, verily, Saruman knows of it. Goods came to him from that land down the road. Spare me, Lord!
Indeed I will say naught of our meeting to any that live."
The Lord of the Nazgûl spared the life of the Wormtongue, not out of pity, but because he deemed that so
great a terror was upon him that he would never dare to speak of their encounter (as proved true), and he
saw that the creature was evil and was likely to do great harm yet to Saruman, if he lived. So he left him
lying on the ground, and rode away, and did not trouble to go back to Isengard. Sauron's vengeance could
wait.
Now he divided his company into four pairs, and they rode separately, but he himself went ahead with the
swiftest pair, Thus they passed west out of Rohan, and explored the desolation of Enedwaith, and came at
last to Tharbad. Thence they rode through Minhiriath, and even though they were not yet assembled a
rumour of dread spread about them, and the creatures of the wild hid themselves, and lonely men fled
away. But some fugitives on the road they captured; and to the delight of the Captain two proved to be
spies and servants of Saruman. One of them had been used much in the traffic between Isengard and the
Shire, and though he had not himself been beyond the Southfarthing he had charts prepared by Saruman
which clearly depicted and described the Shire. These the Nazgûl took, and then sent him on to Bree to
continue spying; but warned him that he was now in the service of Mordor, and that if ever he tried to
return to Isengard they would slay him with torture.
Night was waning on the twenty-second day of September when drawing together again they came to Sarn
Ford and the southernmost borders of the Shire. They found them guarded for the Rangers barred their
way. But this was a task beyond the power of the Dúnedain; and maybe it would still have proved a even
if their captain, Aragorn, had been with them. But he was away to the north, upon the East Road near
Bree; and the hearts even of the Dúnedain misgave them. Some fled northward, hoping to bear news to
Aragorn, but they were pursued and slain or driven away into the wild. Some still dared to bar the ford,
and held it while day lasted, but at night the Lord of Morgul swept them away, and the Black Riders
passed into the Shire; and ere the cocks crowed in the small hours of the twenty-third day of September
some were riding north through the land, even as Gandalf upon Shadowfax was riding over Rohan far
behind.
(ii): Other Versions of the Story
I have chosen to give the version printed above as being the most finished as a narrative; but there is much
other writing that bears on these events, adding to or modifying the story in important particulars. These
manuscripts are confusing and their relations obscure, though they a& doubtless derive from the same
period, and it is sufficient to note the existence of two other primary accounts beside the one printed (here
called for convenience "A"). A second version ("B") agrees very largely with A in its narrative structure,
but a third ("C"), in the form of a plot-outline beginning at a later point in the story, introduces some
substantial differences, and this I am inclined to think is the latest m order of composition. In addition
there is some material ("D") more particularly concerned with Oollum's part in the events, and various
other notes bearing on this part of the history.
In D it is said that what Gollum revealed to Sauron of the Ring and the place of its finding was sufficient
to warn Sauron that this was indeed the One, but that of its present whereabouts he could only discover
that it was stolen by a creature named Baggins in the Misty Mountains, and that Baggins came from a land
called Shire. Sauron's fears were much allayed when he perceived from Gollum's account that Baggins
must have been a creature of the same sort.
Gollum would not know the term "Hobbit," which was local and not a universal Westron word. He would
probably not use "Halfling" since he was one himself, and Hobbits disliked the name. That is why the
Black Riders seem to have had two main pieces of information only to go on: Shire and Baggins.
From all the accounts it is clear that Gollum did at least know in which direction the Shire lay; but though
no doubt more could have been wrung from him by torture, Sauron plainly had no inkling that Baggins
came from a region far removed from the Misty Mountains or that Gollum knew where it was, and
assumed that he would be found in the Vales of Anduin, in the same region as Gollum himself had once
lived.
This was a very small and natural error - but possibly the most important mistake that Sauron made in the
whole affair. But for it, the Black Riders would have reached the Shire weeks sooner.
In the text B more is told of the journey of Aragorn with the captive Gollum northwards to the realm of
Thranduil, and more consideration is given to Sauron's doubts about the use of the Ringwraiths in the
search for the Ring.
[After his release from Mordor] Gollum soon disappeared into the Dead Marshes, where Sauron's
emissaries. could not or would not follow him. No other spies of Sauron could bring him any news.
(Sauron probably had very little power yet in Eriador, and few agents there; and such as he sent were
often hindered or misled by the servants of Saruman). At length therefore he resolved to use the
Ringwraiths. He had been reluctant to do so, until he knew precisely where the Ring was, for several
reasons. They were by far the most powerful of his servants, and the most suitable for such a mission,
since they were entirely enslaved to their Nine Rings, which he now himself held; they were quite
incapable of acting against his will, and if one of them, even the Witch-king their captain, had seized the
One Ring, he would have brought it back to his Master, But they had disadvantages, until open war began
(for which Sauron was not yet ready). All except the Witch-king were apt to stray when alone by daylight;
and all, again save the Witch-King, feared water, and were unwilling, except in dire need, to enter it or to
cross streams unless dryshod by a bridge. 3 Moreover, their chief weapon was terror. This was actually
greater when they were unclad and invisible; and it was greater also when the were gathered together. So
any mission on which they were sent could hardly be conducted with secrecy; while the passage of
Anduin and other rivers presented an obstacle. For such resons Sauron long hesitated, since he did not
desire that his chief enemies should become aware of his servants' errand. It must be supposed that
Sauron did not know at first that anyone save Gollum and "the thief Baggins" had any knowledge of the
Ring. Until Gandalf came and questioned him 4 Gollum did not know that Gandalf had any connexion with
Bilbo, he had not even known of Gandalf's existence.
But when Sauron learned of Gollum's capture by his enemies the situation was drastically changed. When
and how this happened cannot of course be known for certain. Probably long after the event. According to
Aragorn Gollum was taken at nightfall on February 1
st
. Hoping to escape detection by any of Sauron's
spies he drove Gollum through the north end of the Emyn Muil, and crossed Anduin just above Sam Gebir.
Driftwood was often cast up there on the shoals by the east shore, and binding Gollum to a log he swam
across with him, and continued his journey north by tracks as westerly as he could find through the skirts
of Fangorn, and so over Limlight, then over Nimrodel and Silverlode through the eaves of Lórien, 5 and
then on, avoiding Moria and Dimrill Dale, over Gladden until he came near the Carrock. There he
crossed Anduin again, with the help of the Beornings, and passed into the Forest. The whole journey, on
foot, was not much short of nine hundred miles, and this Aragorn accomplished with weariness in fifty
days, reaching Thranduil on the twenty-first of March. 6
It is thus most likely that the first news of Gollum would be learned by the servants of Dol Guldur after
Aragorn entered the Forest; for though the power of Dol Guldur was supposed to come to an end at the
Old Forest Road, its spies were many in the wood. The news evidently did not reach the Nazgûl
commander of Dol Guldur for some time, and he probably did not inform Barad-dûr until he had tried to
learn more of Gollum's whereabouts. It would then no doubt be late in April before Sauron heard that
Gollum had been seen again, apparently captive in the hands of a Man. This might mean little. Neither
Sauron nor any of his servants yet knew of Aragorn or who he was. But evidently later (since the lands of
Thranduil would now be closely watched), possibly a month later, Sauron heard the disquieting news that
the Wise were aware of Gollum, and that Gandalf had passed into Thranduil's realm.
Sauron must then have been filled with anger and alarm. He resolved to use the Ringwraiths as soon as he
could, for speed rather than secrecy was now important. Hoping to alarm his enemies and disturb their
counsels with the fear of war (which he did not intend to make for some time), he attacked Thranduil and
Gondor at about the same time. 7 He had these two additional objects: to capture or kill Gollum, or at
least to deprive his enemies of him; and to force the passage of the bridge of Osgiliath, so that the Nazgûl
could cross, while testing the strength of Gondor.
In the event Gollum escaped. But the passage of the bridge was effected. The forces there used were
probably much less than men in Gondor thought. In the panic of the first assault, when the Witch-king was
allowed to reveal himself briefly in his full terror, 8 the Nazgûl crossed the bridge at night and dispersed
northwards. Without belittling the valour of Gondor, which indeed Sauron found greater far than he had
hoped, it is clear that Boromir and Faramir were able to drive back the enemy and destroy the bridge,
only because the attack had now served main purpose.
My father nowhere explained the Ringwraiths' fear of water. In the account just cited it is made a chief
motive in Sauron's assault on Osgiliath, and it reappears in detailed notes on the movement of the Black
Riders in the Shire: thus of the Rider (who was in fact Khamûl of Dol Guldur, see note 1) seen on the far
side of Bucklebury Ferry just after the Hobbits had crossed (The Fellowship of the Ring I 5) it is said that
"he was well aware that the Ring had crossed the river; but the river was a barrier to his sense of its
movement and that the Nazgûl would not touch the "Elvish" waters of Baranduin. But it is not made clear
how they crossed other rivers that lay in their path, such as the Greyflood, where there was only "a
dangerous ford formed by the ruins of the bridge" (p. 277). My father did indeed note that the idea was
difficult to sustain.
The account of the vain journey of the Nazgûl up the Vales of Anduin is much the same in version B as in
that printed in full above (A), but with the difference that in B the Stoor settlements were not entirely
deserted at that time; and such of the Stoors as dwelt there were slain or driven away by the Nazgûl. 9 In
all the texts the precise dates are slightly at variance both with each other and with those given in the Tale
of Years; these differences are here neglected.
In D is found an account of how Gollum fared after his escape from the Orcs of Dol Guldur and before the
Fellowship entered the West-gate of Moria. This is in a rough state and has required some slight editorial
revision.
It seems clear that pursued both by Elves and Orcs Gollum crossed the Anduin, probably by swimming,
and so eluded the hunt of Sauron; but being still hunted by Elves, and not yet daring to pass near Lórien
(only the lure of the Ring itself made him dare to do this afterwards), he hid himself In Moria. 10 That
was probably in the autumn of the year; after which all trace of him was lost.
What then happened to Gollum cannot of course be known for certain. He was peculiarly fitted to survive
in such straits, though at cost of great misery; but he was in great peril of discovery by the servants of
Sauron that lurked in Moria, 11 especially since such bare necessity of food as he must have he could only
get by thieving dangerously. No doubt he had intended to use Moria simply as a secret passage westward,
his purpose being to find "Shire" himself as quickly as he could; but he became lost, and it was a very
long time before he found his way about. It thus seems probable that he had not long made his way
towards the West-gate when the Nine Walkers arrived. He knew nothing, of course, about the action of the
doors. To him they would seem huge and immovable; and though they had no lock or bar and opened
outwards to a thrust, he did not discover that. In any case he was now far away from any source of food,
for the Orcs were mostly in the East-end of Moria, and was become weak and desperate, so that even if
he had known all about the doors he still could not have thrust them open. 12 It was thus a piece of
singular good fortune for Gollum that the Nine Walkers arrived when they did.
The story of the coming of the Black Riders to Isengard in September 3018, and their subsequent capture
of Grima Wormtongue, as told in A and B, is much altered in version C, which takes up the narrative only
at their return southward over the Limlight. In A and B it was two days after Gandalf's escape from
Orthanc that the Nazgûl came to Isengard; Saruman told them that Gandalf was gone, and denied all
knowledge of the Shire, 13 but was betrayed by Grima whom they captured on the following day as he
hastened to Isengard with news of Gandalf's coming to Edoras. In C, on the other hand, the Black Riders
arrived at the Gate of Isengard while Gandalf was still a prisoner in the tower. In this account, Saruman,
in fear and despair, and perceiving the full horror of service to Mordor, resolved suddenly to yield to
Gandalf, and to beg for his pardon and help. Temporizing at the Gate, he admitted that he had Gandalf
within, and said that he would go and try to discover what he knew; if that were unavailing, he would
deliver Gandalf up to them. Then Saruman hastened to the summit of Orthanc - and found Gandalf gone.
Away south against the setting moon he saw a great Eagle flying towards Edoras.
Now Saruman's case was worse. If Gandalf had escaped there was still a real chance that Sauron would
not get the Ring, and would be defeated. In his heart Saruman recognized the great power and the strange
"good fortune" that went with Gandalf. But now he was left alone to deal with the Nine. His mood
changed, and his pride reasserted itself in anger at Gandalf's escape from impenetrable Isengard, and in a
fury of jealousy. He went back to the Gate, and he lied, saying that he had made Gandalf confess. He did
not admit that this was his own knowledge, not being aware of how much Sauron knew of his mind and
heart. 14 "I will report this myself to the Lord of Barad-dûr," he said loftily, "to whom I speak from afar
on great matters that concern us. But all that you need to know on the mission that he has given you is
where 'the Shire' lies. Tim says Mithrandir, is northwest from here some six hundred miles, on the borders
of the seaward Elvish country." To his pleasure Saruman saw that even the Witch-king did not relish that.
You must cross Isen by the Fords, and then rounding the Mountains' end make for Tharbad upon
Greyflood. Go with speed, and I will report to your Master that you have done so."
This skilful speech convinced even the Witch-king for the moment that Saruman was a faithful ally, high in
Sauron's confidence At once the Riders left the Gate and rode in haste to the Fords of Isen. Behind them
Saruman sent out wolves and Orcs in vain pursuit of Gandalf; but in this he had other purposes also, to
impress his power upon the Nazgûl, perhaps also to prevent them from lingering near, and in his anger he
wished to do some injury to Rohan, and to increase the fear of him which his agent Wormtongue was
building up in Théoden's heart. Wormtongue had been in Isengard not long since, and was then on his way
back to Edoras; among the pursuers were some bearing messages to him.
When he was rid of the Riders Saruman retired to Orthanc, and sat in earnest and dreadful thought. It
seems that he resolved still to temporize, and still to hope to get the Ring for himself. He thought that the
direction of the Riders to the Shire might hinder then rather than help them, for he knew of the guard of the
Rangers, and he believed also (knowing of the oracular dream-words and of Boromir's mission) that the
Ring had gone and was already on the way on Rivendell. At once he marshalled and sent out into Eriador
all the spies, spy-birds, and agents that he could muster.
In this version the element of Grima's capture by the Ringwraiths and his betrayal of Saruman is thus
absent; for of course there is insufficient time by this account for Gandalf to reach Edoras and attempt to
warn King Théoden, and for Grima in his turn to set out for Isengard to warn Saruman, before the Black
Riders were already gone from Rohan. 15 The revelation of Saruman's lying to them here comes about
through the man whom they captured and found to be bearing maps of the Shire (p. 356); and more is told
of this man and of Saruman's dealings with the Shire.
When the Black Riders were far across Enedwaith and drawing near at last to Tharbad, they had what
was for them a great stroke of good fortune, but disastrous for Saruman, 16 and deadly perilous for Frodo.
Saruman had long taken an interest in the Shire - because Gandalf did, and be was suspicious of him; and
because (again in secret imitation of Gandalf) he had taken to the "Halflings' leaf," and needed supplies,
but in pride (having once scoffed at Gandalf's use of the weed) kept this as secret as he could. Latterly
other motives were added. He liked to extend his power, especially into Gandalf's province, and he found
that the money he could provide for the purchase of "leaf" was giving him power, and was corrupting
some of the Hobbits, especially the Bracegirdles, who owned many plantations, and so also the
Sackville-Bagginses. 17 But also he had begun to feel certain that in some way the Shire was connected
wife the Ring in Gandalf's mind. Why this strong guard upon it? He therefore began to collect detailed
information about the Shire, its chief persons and families, its roads, and other matters. For this he used
Hobbits within the Shire, in the pay of the Bracegirdles and the Sackville-Bagginses, but his agents were
Men, of Dunlendish origin. When Gandalf had refused to treat with him Saruman bad redoubled his
efforts. The Rangers were suspicious, but did not actually refuse entry to the servants of Saruman - for
Gandalf was not at liberty to warn them, and when he had gone off to Isengard Saruman was still
recognised as an ally.
Some while ago one of Saruman's most trusted servants (yet a ruffianly fellow, an outlaw driven from
Dunland, where many said that he had Orc-blood) had returned from the borders of the Shire, where he
had been negotiating for the purpose of "leaf" and other supplies. Saruman was beginning to store
Isengard against war. This man was now on his way back to continue the business, and to arrange for the
transport of many goods before autumn failed. 18 He had orders also to get into the Shire if possible and
learn if there had been any departures of persons well-known recently. He was well supplied with maps,
lists of names, and notes concerning the Shire.
This Dunlending was overtaken by several of the Black Riders as they approached the Tharbad crossing.
In an extremity of terror he was haled to the Witch-king and questioned. He saved his life by betraying
Saruman. The Witch-king thus learned that Saruman knew well all along where the Shire was, and knew
much about it, which he could and should have told to Sauron's servants if he had been a true ally. The
Witch-king also obtained much information, including some about the only name that interested him:
Baggins. It was for this reason that Hobbiton was singled out as one of the points for immediate visit and
enquiry.
The Witch-king had now a clearer understanding of the matter. He had known something of the country
long ago, in his wars with the Dúnedain, and especially of the Tyrn Gothad of Cardolan, now the Barrowdowns, whose evil wights had been sent there by himself. 19 Seeing that his Master suspected some move
between the Shire and Rivendell, he saw also that Bree (the position of which he knew) would be an
important point, at least for information. 20 He put therefore the Shadow of Fear on the Dunlending, and
sent turn on to Bree as an agent. He was the squint-eyed southerner at the Inn. 21
In version B it is noted that the Black Captain did not know whether the Ring was still in the Shire; that he
had to find out. The Shire was too large for a violent onslaught such as he had made on the Stoors; he must
use as much stealth and as little terror as he could, and yet also guard the eastern borders. Therefore he
sent some of the Riders into the Shire, with orders to disperse while traversing it; and of these Khamûl
was to find Hobbiton (see note 1), where "Baggins" lived, according to Saruman's papers. But the Black
Captain established a camp at Andrath, where the Greenway passed in a defile between the Barrow-
downs and the South Downs; 22 and from there some others were sent to watch and patrol the eastern
borders, while he himself visited the Barrow-downs. In notes on the movements of the Black Riders at
that time it is said that the Black Captain stayed there for some days, and the Barrow-wights were roused,
and all things of evil spirit, hostile to Elves and Men, were on the watch with malice in the Old Forest
and on the Barrow-downs.
(iii) Concerning Gandalf, Saruman and the Shire
Another set of papers from the same period consists of a large number of unfinished accounts of
Saruman's earlier dealings with the Shire, especially as they concerned the "Halflings' leaf," a matter that
is touched on in connection with the "squint-eyed southerner" (see pp. 362-3). The following text is one
version among many, but though briefer than some is the most finished.
Saruman soon became jealous of Gandalf, and this rivalry turned at last to a hatred, the deeper for being
concealed, and the more bitter in that Saruman knew in his heart that the Grey Wanderer had the greater
strength, and the greater influence upon the dwellers in Middle-earth, even though he hid his power and
desired neither fear nor reverence. Saruman did not revere him, but he grew to fear him, being ever
uncertain how much Gandalf perceived of his inner mind, troubled more by his silences than by his
words. So it was that openly he treated Gandalf with less respect than did others of the Wise, and was
ever ready to gainsay him or to make little of his counsels; while secretly he noted and pondered all that
he said, setting a watch, so far as he was able, upon all his movements.
It was in this way that Saruman came to give thought to the Halflings and the Shire, which otherwise he
would have deemed beneath his notice. He had at first no thought that the interest of his rival in this
people had any connexion with the great concerns of the Council, least of all with the Rings of Power, For
indeed in the beginning it had no such connexion, and was due only to Gandalf's love for the Little People,
unless his heart had some deep premonition beyond his waking thought. For many years he visited the
Shire openly, and would speak of its people to any who would listen; and Saruman would smile, as at the
idle tales of an old land-rover, but he took heed nonetheless.
Seeing then that Gandalf thought the Shire worth visiting, Saruman himself visited it, but disguised and in
the utmost secrecy, until he had explored and noted all its ways and lands, and thought then he had learned
all that there was to know of it. And even when it seemed to him no longer wise nor profitable to go
thither, he still had spies and servants that went in or kept an eye upon its borders. For he was still
suspicious. He was himself so far fallen that he believed all others of the Council had each their deep and
far-reaching policies for their own enhancement, to which all that they did must in some way refer. So
when long after he learned something of the finding of Gollum's Ring by the Halfling, he could believe
only that Gandalf .had known of this all the time; and this was his greatest grievance, since all that
concerned the Rings he deemed his especial province. That Gandalf's mistrust of him was merited and
just in no way lessened his anger.
Yet in truth Saruman's spying and great secrecy had not in the beginning any evil purpose, but was no more
than a folly born of pride. Small matters, unworthy it would seem to be reported, may yet prove of great
moment ere the end. Now truth to tell, observing Gandalf's love of the herb that he called "pipe-weed"
(for which, he said, if for nothing else, the Little People should be honoured), Saruman had affected to
scoff at it, but in private he made trial of it, and soon began to use it; and for tins reason the Shire
remained important to him. Yet he dreaded lest this should be discovered, and his own mockery turned
against him, so that he would be laughed at for imitating Gandalf, and scorned for doing so by stealth.
This then was the reason for his great secrecy in all his dealings with the Shire even from the first before
any shadow of doubt had fallen upon it, and it was little guarded, free for those who wished to enter. For
this reason also Saruman ceased to go thither in person; for it came to his knowledge that he had not been
all unobserved by the keen-eyed Halflings, and some, seeing the figure as it were of an old man clad in
grey or russet stealing through the woods or passing through the dusk, had mistaken him for Gandalf.
After that Saruman went no more to the Shire, fearing that such tales might spread and come maybe to the
ears of Gandalf. But Gandalf knew of these visits, and guessed their object, and he laughed, thinking this
the most harmless of Saruman's secrets; but he said nothing to others, for it was never his wish that any
one should be put to shame. Nonetheless he was not ill-pleased when the visits of Saruman ceased,
doubting him already, though he could not himself yet foresee that a time would come when Saruman's
knowledge of the Shire would prove perilous and of the greatest service to the Enemy, bringing victory to
within a nail's breadth of his grasp.
In another version there is a description of the occasion when Saruman openly scoffed at Gandalf's use of
the "pipe-weed:"
Now because of his dislike and fear, in the later days Saruman avoided Gandalf, and they seldom met,
except at the assemblies of the White Council. It was at the great Council held in 2851 that the "Halflings'
leaf" was first spoken of, and the matter was noted with amusement at the time, though it was afterwards
remembered in a different light. The Council met in Rivendell, and Gandalf sat apart, silent, but smoking
prodigiously (a thing he had never done before on such an occasion), while Saruman spoke against him,
and urged that contrary to Gandalf's advice Dol Guldur should not yet be molested. Both the silence and
the smoke seemed greatly to annoy Saruman, and before the Council dispersed be said to Gandalf: "When
weighty matters are in debate, Mithrandir, I wonder a little that you should play with your toys of fire and
smoke, while others are in earnest speech." 1
But Gandalf laughed, and replied: "You would not wonder if you used this herb yourself. Yon might find
that smoke blown out cleared your mind of shadows within. Anyway, it gives patience, to listen to error
without anger. But it is not one of my toys. It is an art of the Little People away in the West: merry and
worthy folk, though not of much account, perhaps, in your high policies." 1
Saruman was little appeased by this answer (for he hated mockery, however gentle), and he said then
coldly: "You jest, Lord Mithrandir, as is your way. I know well enough that you have become a curious
explorer of the small: weeds, wild things and childish folk. Your time is your own to spend, if you have
nothing worthier to do; and your friends you may make as you please. But to me the days are too dark for
wanderers' tales, and I have no time for the simples of peasants."
Gandalf did not laugh again; and he did not answer, but looking keenly at Saruman he drew on his pipe
and sent out a great ring of smoke with many smaller rings that followed it. Then he put up his hand, as if
to grasp them, and they vanished. With that he got up and left Saruman without another word; but Saruman
stood for some time silent, and his face was dark with doubt and displeasure.
This story appears in half a dozen different manuscripts, and in one of them it is said that Saruman was
suspicious,
doubting whether he read rightly the purport of Gandalf's gesture with the rings of smoke (above all
whether it showed any connexion between the Halflings and the great matter of the Rings of Power,
unlikely though that might seem); and doubting that one so great could concern himself with such a people
as the Halflings for their own sake merely.
In another (struck through) Gandalf's purpose is made explicit:
It was a strange chance, that being angered by his insolence Gandalf chose this way of showing to
Saruman his suspicion that desire to possess them had begun to enter into his policies and his study of the
lore of the Rings; and of warning him that they would elude him. For it cannot be doubted that Gandalf had
as yet no thought that the Halflings (and still less their smoking) had any connection with the Rings. 23 If
he had had any such thought, then certainly he would not have done then what he did. Yet later when the
Halflings did indeed become involved in this greatest matter, Saruman could believe only that Gandalf
had known or foreknown this, and had concealed the knowledge from him and from the Council - for just
such a purpose as Saruman would conceive: to gain possession and to forestall him.
In the Tale of Years the entry for 2851 refers to the meeting to the White Council in that year, when
Gandalf urged an attack on Dol Guldur but was overruled by Saruman; and a footnote to the entry reads:
"It afterwards became clear that Saruman had then begun to desire to possess the One Ring himself, and
hoped that it might reveal itself, seeking its master, if Sauron were let be for a time." The foregoing story
shows that Gandalf himself suspected Saruman of this at the time of the Council of 2851; though my father
afterwards commented that it appears from Gandalf's story to the Council of Elrond of his meeting with
Radagast that he did not seriously suspect Saruman of treachery (or of desiring the Ring for himself) until
he was imprisoned in Orthanc.
NOTES
1 According to the entry in the Tale of Years for 2951 Sauron sent three, not two, of the Nazgûl to
reoccupy Dol Guldur. The two statements can be reconciled on the assumption that one of the Ringwraiths
of Dol Guldur returned afterwards to Minas Morgul but I think it more likely that the formulation of the
present text was superseded when the Tale of Years was compiled; and it may be noted that in a rejected
version of the present passage there was only one Nazgûl in Dol Guldur (not named as Khamûl, but
referred to as "the Second Chief (the Black Easterling)"), while one remained with Sauron as his chief
messenger.- From notes counting in detail the movements of the Black Riders in the Shire it emerges that it
was Khamûl who came to Hobbiton and spoke to Gaffer Gamgee, who followed the Hobbits along the
road to Stock, and who narrowly missed them at the Bucklebury Ferry (see p.360). The Rider who
accompanied him, whom he summoned by cries on the ridge above Woodhall, and with whom he visited
Farmer Maggot, was "his companion from Dol Guldur." Of Khamûl it is said here that he was the most
ready of all the Nazgûl after the Black Captain himself, to perceive the presence of the Ring, but also the
one whose power was most confused and diminished by daylight.
2 He had indeed in his terror of the Nazgûl dared to hide in Moria. [Author's note.]
3 At the Ford of Bruinen only the Witch-king and two others, with the lure of the Ring straight before
them, had dared to enter the river; the others were driven into it by Glorfindel and Aragorn. [Author's
note.]
4 Gandalf, as he recounted to the Council of Elrond, questioned Gollum while he was imprisoned by the
Elves of Thranduil.
5 Gandalf told the Council of Elrond that after he left Minas Tirith "messages came to me out of Lórien
that Aragorn had passed that way, and that he had found the creature called Gollum." I
6 Gandalf arrived two days later, and left on the 29
th of March early in the morning. After the Carrock he
had a horse, but he had the High Pass over the Mountains to cross. He got a fresh horse at Rivendell, and
making the greatest speed he could he reached Hobbiton late on the 12
th of April, after a journey of nearly
eight hundred miles. [Author's note.]
7 Both here and in the Tale of Years the assault on Osgiliath is dated the 20
th of June.
8 This statement no doubt relates to Boromir's account of the battle at Osgiliath which he gave to the
Council of Elrond: "A power was there that we have not felt before. Some said that it could be seen, like
a great black horseman, a dark shadow under the moon."
9 In a letter written in 1959 my father said: "Between 2463 [Déagol the Stoor found the One Ring,
according to the Tale of Years] and the beginning of Gandalf's special enquiries concerning the Ring
(nearly 500 years later) they [the Stoors] appear indeed to have died out altogether (except of course for
Sméagol); or to have fled from the shadow of Dol Guldur."
10 According to the author's note given in Note 2 above, Gollum fled into Moria from terror of the
Nazgûl; cf. also the suggestion on p.354 that one of the purposes of the Lord of Morgul in riding on
northward beyond the Gladden was the hope of finding Gollum.
11 These were in fact not very numerous, it would seem; but sufficient to keep any intruders out, if not
better armed or prepared than Balin's company, and not in great numbers. [Author's note.]
12 According to the Dwarves this needed usually the thrust or two; only a very strong Dwarf could open
them single-handed. Before the desertion of Moria doorwards were kept inside the West-gate and one at
least was always there. In this way a single person (and so any intruder or person trying to escape) could
not get out without permission. [Author's note.]
13 In A, Saruman denied knowledge of where the Ring was hid; in B he "denied all knowledge of the land
that they sought." But this is probably no more than a difference of wording.
14 Earlier in this version it is said that Sauron had at this time, by means of the palantíri, at last begun to
daunt Saruman, and could in any case often read his thought even when he withheld information. Thus
Sauron was aware that Saruman had some guess at the place where the Ring was; and Saruman actually
revealed that he had got as his prisoner Gandalf, who knew the most.
15 The entry for the 18
th of September 3018 in the Tale of Years reads: "Gandalf escapes from Orthanc in
the early hours. The Black Riders cross the Fords of Isen." Laconic as this entry is, giving no hint that the
Riders visited Isengard, it seems to be based on the story told in version C.
16 No indication is given in any of these texts of what passed between Sauron and Saruman as a result of
the latter's unmasking.
17 Lobelia Bracegirdle married Otho Sackville-Baggins; their son was Lotho, who seized control of the
Shire at the time of the War of the Ring, and was then known as "the Chief." Farmer Cotton referred in
conversation with Frodo to Lotho's property in leaf-plantations in the Southfarthing (The Return of the
King VI 8).
18 The usual way was by the crossing of Tharbad to Dunland (rather than direct to Isengard), whence
goods were sent more secretly on to Saruman. [Author's note.]
19 Cf. The Lord of the Rings, Appendix A (I, iii. The North-kingdom, and the Dúnedain): "It was at this
time [during the Great Plague that reached Gondor in 1636] that an end came of the Dúnedain of Cardolan,
and evil spirits out of Angmar and Rhudaur entered into the deserted mounds and dwelt there."
20 Since the Black Captain knew so much, it is perhaps strange that he had had so little idea of where the
Shire, the land of the Halflings, lay; according to the Tale of Years there were already Hobbits settled in
Bree at the beginning of the fourteenth century of the Third Age, when the Witch-king came north to
Angmar.
21 See The Fellowship of the Ring I, 9. When Strider and the Hobbits left Bree (ibid. I, 11) Frodo caught
a glimpse of the Dunlending ("a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes") in Bill Ferny's house on tin outskirts
of Bree, and thought: "He looks more than half like a goblin."
22 Cf. Gandalf's words at the Council of Elrond: "Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree."
23 As the concluding sentence of this quotation shows, the meaning is: "Gandalf had as yet no thought that
the Halflings would have in the future any connexion with the Rings." The meeting of the White Council in
2851 took place ninety years before Bilbo found the Ring.
